The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Smoky Mountains National Park
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Great Smoky Mountains National Park
        Tennessee--North Carolina, open all year

Creator: United States. National Park Service

Release date: August 19, 2023 [eBook #71447]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington DC: U. S. Government Printing Office

Credits: Bob Taylor, Lisa Corcoran, Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




  Great Smoky
  Mountains
  NATIONAL PARK

  TENNESSEE—NORTH CAROLINA
  OPEN ALL YEAR

  [Illustration: stream in woods]

  UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE
  INTERIOR · Douglas McKay, _Secretary_
  NATIONAL PARK SERVICE · Conrad L. Wirth, _Director_




  Great Smoky
  Mountains
  NATIONAL PARK

  The National Park System, of which this park is a unit, is
  dedicated to conserving the scenic, scientific, and historic
  heritage of the United States for the benefit and enjoyment of its
  people.


Great Smoky Mountains National Park is located on the crest of the
high divide which forms the boundary between Tennessee and North
Carolina. This mountain range, representing one of the oldest uplands
on earth, zigzags through the park from northeast to southwest for 71
miles, or 54 miles by air line. For 36 miles along its main crest the
range maintains an altitude in excess of 5,000 feet. Sixteen of its
peaks rise more than 6,000 feet. The deep blue haze rising from the
valleys to the summits of the lofty peaks gives these mountains their
name.

[Illustration: _View from Heintooga Overlook._]

Renowned for its splendid forests and containing a rich variety
of plant life, the Great Smokies region has long been regarded by
prominent botanists as the cradle of the present vegetation of
eastern America.

Arnold Guyot, eminent scientist whose exploration of the Appalachian
System began a century ago, was the first to describe the Great Smoky
Mountains from personal observation. He wrote:

“Although the high peaks of the Smoky mountains are some fifty feet
lower than the isolated and almost exceptional group of the Black
mountains, by their number, their magnitude, the continuity and
general elevation of the chains, and of the base upon which they
repose, they are like a massive and high citadel which is really the
culminating region of all the Appalachian System.”




History of the Park


Prior to the start of the 20th century, the area now comprising
the park was little known to the outside world, although DeSoto is
believed to have viewed the mountains. They were, and still are, the
home of the Cherokees who now occupy the Cherokee Indian Reservation
in North Carolina, adjacent to the park on the south. The few white
settlers were the rugged mountaineer descendants of colonists from
England and Scotland who lived isolated and primitive lives. The
Great Smokies region became better known during and subsequent to
World War I when logging railroads of lumber companies penetrated
some of its virgin forests. Still later, highways skirted the area
and visitors were able to view its majestic peaks from a distance.

The successful movement for the creation of a national park in this
area was begun in 1923, and its establishment was authorized by
the Federal Government by act of Congress approved May 22, 1926.
Enabling acts were passed by the State legislatures of North Carolina
and Tennessee in 1927, and land acquisition was begun with State
funds, matched by a generous donation made by John D. Rockefeller,
Jr., through the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, in honor of
his mother. Subsequently, Federal funds were made available for the
completion of the project.

On February 6, 1930, the Governors of North Carolina and Tennessee
presented the Secretary of the Interior with deeds to an initial
158,876 acres of land on behalf of their respective States. A limited
park was thus established for administration and protection. The
park, now containing 507,168 acres of Federal lands, was formally
dedicated on September 2, 1946.




Pioneer Culture in the Great Smokies


Great Smoky Mountains National Park presents an opportunity to
preserve frontier conditions of a century ago. The cultural and human
interest aspects of this park are exceeded only by its scenery and
natural history.

In places where the forest has not yet encroached upon them, there
are clearings which were the sloping little farms of the mountain
pioneers. Sturdy log structures in varying stages of disintegration
remain there as evidence of a way of life which has practically
disappeared in eastern United States. Some of these log cabins,
barns, and other buildings have been rehabilitated in place so that
you may see the original structures in their true setting. Most of
them are in Cades Cove, where the park’s only grist mill powered by
an overshot wheel is located. Cades Cove, an isolated, oval-shaped
valley surrounded by mountains, is a region of outstanding pastoral
charm which you should visit.

Some of the finest of various types of authentic pioneer structures
have been assembled in the immediate vicinity of the Oconaluftee
Ranger Station and Pioneer Museum, located on the cross-mountain
highway about 2 miles north of Cherokee, N. C. On display in the
museum are tools, household objects, and a variety of other handmade
items which were used by the pioneers who made their homes on lands
which now comprise the park. This building is open from 9 a. m. to 5
p. m., April through October.




The Cherokee Indian Reservation


You will be interested in the Cherokee Indians on the Cherokee
Reservation, which is immediately south of the park. Although the
Government has instituted here a comprehensive system of education
and modern methods of living, ancient ceremonies and sports are
preserved as tribal customs.

[Illustration:

  THOMPSON PHOTO

_Rhododendron along the trail to Mount Le Conte._]




Forests


Crowning the highest peaks with spruce and fir and carpeting the
mountainsides with a wealth of deciduous trees is an unbroken
forest cover, which cannot be matched in eastern America. In all of
Europe there are not as many species of native trees as are to be
found in Great Smoky Mountains National Park. A number of these,
such as Canada hemlock, silverbell, red spruce, yellow buckeye, and
mountain-ash grow to record size, while others become giants of their
kind. Approximately 40 percent of the more than half-million acres
which comprise the park are in the original forested condition. A
total of 130 native tree species are known to grow in this area.




Other Plant Life


Few, if any, areas in the eastern United States possess so great a
variety of plants. Altogether, the tree, shrub, and herb varieties
total more than 1,300. Botanists have also listed over 1,800 species
of fungi, 330 mosses and liverworts, and 230 lichens. The earliest
flowers occasionally appear by the close of February in lowland
areas, while the witchhazel, latest to bloom, may hold its blossoms
into December. Late April finds the spring flowers, including the
abundant dogwood, at their blossoming peak; May is best for the
mountain laurel; middle June usually finds both the flame azalea and
rose-purple rhododendron at their finest; middle July is likely to be
the peak of the great white rhododendron’s flowering. Autumn colors
are excellent throughout October, with the height of coloration near
the end of the month.




A Wildlife Sanctuary


Here, as in all national parks, wildlife is given complete
protection. No hunting or trapping is permitted. Since establishment
of the park, the black bear population has increased considerably, and
such animals as the white-tailed deer, red and gray foxes, raccoon,
bobcat, wild turkey, ruffed grouse, and others find sanctuary in
these mountains. More than 52 species of fur-bearing animals, some
200 birds, 36 reptiles, 37 amphibians, and 80 fishes are known to
live here.

=The feeding, touching, teasing, or molesting of bears is
prohibited.= This regulation is enforced strictly for the protection
of the public. Persons using park trails have nothing to fear from
unmolested bears. If tempted by food, however, some bears, which
frequent sections of the motor road, become dangerous. They should
not be fed or approached. Persons using the Appalachian Trail
shelters can protect their food supplies by suspending them from tree
limbs outside the shelter.




Fishing


Approximately 600 miles of streams, many of them well suited to
trout, flow down the slopes of the Great Smoky Mountains. Each year
thousands of hatchery-reared trout are released in the more heavily
fished waters. Rainbow and brook trout and small-mouth bass lure the
devotees of Izaak Walton. Persons fishing in park waters must have
the State or county license issued and required by North Carolina, or
the State license issued and required by Tennessee, depending upon
the section of the park being fished. Catches are regulated, and some
streams may be found closed for restocking. The fishing season is
from May 16 to August 31. Current regulations may be obtained from
the office of the superintendent or from park rangers or wardens.




Interpretive Service


Beginning in May and continuing for 6 months, a program of
naturalist-guided field trips and talks is available. This service is
maintained by the Government and is free to the public.

Naturalists meet hikers at designated points in or near the park and
conduct visits to outstanding objectives over good trails. Plant and
animal life is discussed informally along the way. There are several
types of walks ranging from 2 hours to all day. Illustrated talks are
given in the evenings at regular intervals, chiefly in hotel lobbies
and other points of visitor-concentration.

Programs describing the nature-guide service are available
(May-October) at headquarters and at Oconaluftee Ranger Station and
are posted in hotels and various places throughout the park.




Accommodations


Free modern campgrounds are provided on the Tennessee side of the
park at the Chimney Tops, 6 miles south of Gatlinburg, and Cades
Cove, 7 miles from the Townsend entrance to the park; on the North
Carolina side at Smokemont, on the transmountain highway, Balsam
Mountain, 10 miles from Soco Gap on U. S. 19 (Blue Ridge Parkway
spur), and Deep Creek, 2 miles from Bryson City. Aside from these
campgrounds, the only accommodations in the park are at Le Conte
Lodge on the top of Mount Le Conte, accessible only by foot or
horseback. For reservations and rates, write Jack Huff, Gatlinburg,
Tenn.

A number of hotel and tourist courts are available in cities and
towns near the park, and at Knoxville and Asheville. Inquiries
regarding these accommodations should be addressed to Knoxville
Tourist Bureau, Henley Street, Knoxville, Tenn.; East Tennessee
Automobile Club, Knoxville, Tenn., Chambers of Commerce of
Gatlinburg, Knoxville, and Maryville, Tenn., Asheville, Waynesville,
Bryson City, and Sylva, N. C.; Cherokee Association, Cherokee, N. C.;
and Government Services, Inc., Fontana Village, Fontana Dam, N. C.




Administration


Great Smoky Mountains National Park is administered by the National
Park Service of the United States Department of the Interior. A
superintendent, whose address is Gatlinburg, Tenn., is in immediate
charge. Park headquarters are located 2 miles south of Gatlinburg.
A member of the protection division maintains headquarters at
Oconaluftee Ranger Station, N. C., on U. S. 441; post office,
Cherokee, N. C.

[Illustration:

  THOMPSON PHOTO

_Newfound Gap, highest point on the transmountain highway._]




Help Us Protect This Park


Please note the following requirements which are necessary for the
protection of the natural beauties of the park, as well as for your
comfort and convenience:

The park is a sanctuary for all living things. It is a violation of
the law to destroy, injure, or disturb trees, shrubs, flowers, birds,
animals, or any natural feature in the park.

The speed limit is 35 miles an hour, unless otherwise posted. Drive
carefully; keep to the right. Report all accidents to a park ranger.

Camping or lighting fires at places other than designated campgrounds
or picnic areas is not allowed, except by permit. To camp in remote
sections of the park, except during periods of high fire hazard,
permits may be secured at the office of the superintendent, the
Oconaluftee Ranger Station, or from the district park rangers or
wardens. Camping is restricted to certain periods at the campgrounds.
Individual sites provided with fireplaces and water are available.

Please help to keep the park clean. Do not scatter papers, picnic
remnants, and the like; use trash receptacles along roads, in picnic
areas, and campgrounds.

Fire is one of the greatest dangers to the park. Put out fires
completely upon leaving. Be sure cigarettes and matches are out
before disposal. Lunches may be eaten along roadsides, but fires
should not be built.

Only those persons having special permits may collect botanical or
geological specimens in the park. Such permits may be secured by
competent scientists upon application to the superintendent.

Dogs and cats are permitted in the park if on leash, crated, or
otherwise under physical restrictive control at all times.

The feeding, touching, teasing, or molesting of bears is prohibited.

Deliberate infraction of park regulations may bring penalty of fine
or imprisonment or both.


[Illustration: Memorial Plaque

  The founders of Great Smoky Mountains National Park are honored
  with a memorial at Newfound Gap, on the North Carolina-Tennessee
  line. A bronze plaque on a high terrace wall of the memorial bears
  the following inscription:

  “=FOR THE PERMANENT ENJOYMENT OF THE PEOPLE—This Park Was Given
  One-half By The Peoples And States of North Carolina And Tennessee
  And By The United States of America And One-Half In Memory of Laura
  Spelman Rockefeller By The Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial
  Founded By Her Husband John D. Rockefeller.=”]

  Revised 1954      16—53420-6      GPO

[Illustration: GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK]

COMPLETELY EXTINGUISH MATCHES AND CIGARETTES BEFORE THROWING AWAY.
BE SURE CAMPFIRE IS OUT BEFORE LEAVING IT.
ALWAYS USE CAR ASHTRAYS.
LET'S NOT BE GUILTY OF STARTING A FOREST FIRE.


                                 |               From—
                                 +————————————+——————————+—————————
               To—               | Gatlinburg | Cherokee | Townsend
                                 |  entrance  | entrance | entrance
  ———————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————
                                 |   _Miles_  |  _Miles_ | _Miles_
  Park Headquarters              |      1.5   |    28.3  |   18.5
  Pioneer Museum and Oconaluftee |     27.9   |     1.9  |   45.9
    Ranger Station               |            |          |
  Chimneys Campground            |      6.5   |    23.6  |   23.5
  Smokemont Campground           |     24.6   |     5.2  |   41.5
  Balsam Mountain Campground     |     53.3   |    23.5  |   71.3
                                 |            |          |
  Cades Cove Campground          |     26.0   |    63.0  |    7.7
                                 |            |          |
  Deep Creek Campground          |     45.8   |    16.0  |   63.8
                                 |            |          |
  Heintooga Ridge Picnic Area    |     53.8   |    24.0  |   71.8
  Chimneys Footbridge            |      8.7   |    21.1  |   25.7
  Alum Cave Parking Area         |     10.5   |    19.3  |   27.5
  Cherokee Orchard               |      4.7   |    35.5  |   24.7
  Newfound Gap                   |     15.0   |    14.8  |   42.0
                                 |            |          |
  Indian Gap                     |     16.3   |    16.1  |   43.3
  Forney Ridge Parking Area      |     22.5   |    22.3  |   49.5
                                 |            |          |
  Fighting Creek Gap             |      4.6   |    31.4  |   15.4
  Cherokee Indian Reservation    |     31.3   |     1.5  |   48.5
  Little River Gorge             |      5.8   |    32.5  |    1.0
                                 |            |          |
  Cades Cove                     |     26.0   |    63.0  |    7.7
  Tremont “Y”                    |     18.2   |    45.0  |    0.7
  Greenbrier                     |     11.0   |    43.0  |   31.0
  Cosby                          |     23.1   |    52.0  |   43.1
  Cataloochee                    |     50.4   |    60.5  |   70.4
  Loop trip around western end   |    165.0   |   165.0  |  165.0
    of park                      |            |          |
  ———————————————————————————————+————————————+——————————+—————————


               To—      |Elevation|        Remarks                | Map
                        |         |                               |Index
  ——————————————————————+—————————+———————————————————————————————+———————
                        |  _Feet_ |                               |
  Park Headquarters     |   1,463 | Office of superintendent      | F-2.
  Pioneer Museum and    |   2,025 | Museum; park office,          | I-4.
    Oconaluftee Ranger  |         |   North Carolina section      |
    Station             |         |                               |
  Chimneys Campground   |   2,750 | In Tennessee section on       | G-3.
                        |         |   U. S. 441                   |
  Smokemont Campground  |   2,198 | In North Carolina section on  | I-4.
                        |         |   U. S. 441                   |
  Balsam Mountain       |   5,340 | In North Carolina section;    | J-4.
    Campground          |         |   11.3 miles north            |
                        |         |   of U. S. 19                 |
  Cades Cove Campground |   1,960 | In Tennessee section; 7 miles | C-3.
                        |         |   south of Tennessee Route 73 |
  Deep Creek Campground |   1,800 | In North Carolina section; 2.1| G-5.
                        |         |   miles north of U. S. 19     |
  Heintooga Ridge       |   5,325 | Excellent mountain vistas     | J-4.
    Picnic Area         |         |                               |
  Chimneys Footbridge   |   3,550 | At parking area above lower   | G-3.
                        |         |   tunnel                      |
  Alum Cave Parking     |   3,850 | Trail to Alum Cave Bluffs     | G-3.
    Area                |         |   and Mount Le Conte          |
  Cherokee Orchard      |   2,550 | Trails to Mount Le Conte and  | G-2.
                        |         |   Rainbow Falls               |
  Newfound Gap          |   5,048 | Where U. S. 441 crosses       | G-3.
                        |         |   Smokies, Appalachian Trail, |
                        |         |   and Clingmans Dome Highway  |
  Indian Gap            |   5,266 | Historic pass through Smokies | G-3.
  Forney Ridge Parking  |   6,311 | Clingmans Dome Trail          | G-4.
    Area                |         |                               |
  Fighting Creek Gap    |   2,320 | Trail to Laurel Falls and     | F-2.
                        |         |   Cove Mountain               |
  Cherokee Indian       |   1,900 | Eastern band of Cherokee      | I-5.
    Reservation         |         |   Indians                     |
  Little River Gorge    |   2,000 | Scenic drive                  |E-2 and
                        |to 1,100 |                               | D-2.
  Cades Cove            |   1,807 | Extensive level area          | C-3.
                        |         |   surrounded by mountains     |
  Tremont “Y”           |   1,147 | Junction of Cades Cove and    | D-3.
                        |         |   Little River Roads          |
  Greenbrier            |   1,680 | Trails into area of excellent | H-2.
                        |         |   forests and streams         |
  Cosby                 |   2,459 | Northeastern section of park, | J-1.
                        |         |   Tennessee side              |
  Cataloochee           |   2,643 | Excellent scenic drive,       | K-3.
                        |         |   eastern section of park     |
  Loop trip around      |   ...   | One-day drive, Gatlinburg to  |
    western end of park |         |   park headquarters, Elkmont, |
                        |         |   Townsend, Maryville, Tapoca,|
                        |         |   Bryson City, Cherokee, and  |
                        |         |   Gatlinburg                  |
  ——————————————————————+—————————+———————————————————————————————+———————




How To Reach the Park


Paved highways from all States converge at Knoxville, Tenn., and
Asheville, N. C. Bus lines maintain service to both cities. The
Southern Railway and the Louisville & Nashville Railroad serve
Knoxville; the former also serves Asheville. Knoxville may also be
reached by American, Capital (PCA), and Delta Airlines; Asheville,
by Capital (PCA), Delta, and Piedmont Airlines. Trailways buses make
seven trips each way, daily, between Knoxville and Asheville, going
through the park via Gatlinburg and Cherokee. North Carolina towns
bordering the park may be reached by direct buses from Atlanta and
Chattanooga. Excursions by bus also may be made from Knoxville,
stopping overnight at Gatlinburg and continuing to Knoxville via
Maryville, Tenn. Smoky Mountain Tours, Inc., with offices in both
Knoxville and Asheville, operate personally conducted sightseeing
stages through the park between the two cities frequently during
the summer. The Southern Railway offers both one-way and round-trip
tickets, providing travel by bus through the park between Knoxville
and Asheville.




The Seasons


Summer days are usually warm or hot in the lowland areas and cool in
the higher mountains; the nights are cool.

Spring arrives early in the lowland areas and progressively later at
higher elevations. Weather conditions are particularly favorable in
autumn, with less rainfall at that season. Winters are variable, both
as to severity and length, but they normally are mild in the lowlands.

Rain, snow, and fog often are encountered in the mountains during the
winter. Roads are kept open all year, but the transmountain highway
sometimes is closed for a few hours during heavy snow or sleet storms
when snowplows cannot keep it open. Snows are infrequent in the park,
but you should take chains if you plan to drive through in winter.
Roads are posted if driving conditions are unfavorable.




Horses, Pack Animals, and Guide Service


In some of the towns bordering the park, horses and pack animals,
with guide service, may be rented by the hour, day, or for longer
periods.

          Destination        |         Trail starts         |Elevation
  ———————————————————————————+——————————————————————————————+————————
                             |                              | _Feet_
  Laurel Falls               |Fighting Creek Gap (see Road  |  2,500
                             |  Distances)                  |
  Clingmans Dome Summit      |Forney Ridge Parking Area     |  6,643
  Andrews Bald               |Forney Ridge Parking Area     |  5,860
  Alum Cave Bluffs           |Alum Cave Parking Area (see   |  4,900
                             |  Road Distances)             |
  Mount Le Conte: via Alum   |Alum Cave Parking Area (see   |  6,593
      Cave Bluffs            |  Road Distances)             |
    via Boulevard            |Newfound Gap (see Road        |  6,593
                             |  Distances)                  |
    via Cherokee Orchard     |Cherokee Orchard via Rainbow  |  6,593
                             |  Falls                       |
                             |Cherokee Orchard via Bullhead |  6,593
                             |Cherokee Orchard via Trillium |  6,593
                             |  Gap                         |
    via Roaring Fork         |Gatlinburg and Trillium Gap   |  6,593
  The Jumpoff                |Newfound Gap                  |  6,100
  Charlies Bunion            |Newfound Gap                  |  5,375
  Gregory Bald               |Cades Cove                    |  4,948
  Chimney Tops               |Chimneys Bridge (see Road     |  4,755
                             |  Distances)                  |
  Mount Cammerer             |Davenport Gap                 |  5,025
  Ramsey Cascades            |Greenbrier                    |  4,750
  Raven Fork Wilderness      |Smokemont                     |  4,202
  Mount Sterling Tower       |Mount Sterling Gap            |  5,835
  Sharp Top on Noland Divide |Bryson City (at park line)    |  3,430
  Bryson Place               |Bryson City                   |  2,411
  ———————————————————————————+——————————————————————————————+————————

                       | Distance |                                 | Map
     Destination       |round trip|      Remarks                    |Index
  —————————————————————+——————————+—————————————————————————————————+—————
                       | _Miles_  |                                 |
  Laurel Falls         |    2.5   | One of the most popular hiking  | E-2.
                       |          |   trips                         |
  Clingmans Dome Summit|    1.0   | One-half mile paved trail leads | G-4.
                       |          |   to one of the highest peaks   |
                       |          |   in East; highest in park.     |
  Andrews Bald         |    4.0   | One of the most popular hikes   | G-4.
                       |          |   in park.                      |
  Alum Cave Bluffs     |    5.0   | Easy trail, fine views. Best    | G-3.
                       |          |   for rose-purple rhododendron  |
                       |          |   in mid-June. Alum Cave Bluffs.|
  Mount Le Conte: via  |   10.4   | Shortest way to Mount Le Conte  | G-3.
                       |          |   and very spectacular.         |
      Alum Cave Bluffs |          |   Foot trail only.              |
    via Boulevard      |   16.0   | Follows Appalachian Trail to    | G-3.
                       |          |   Mount Kephart and             |
                       |          |   thence along Boulevard Trail  |
                       |          |   to Le Conte.                  |
    via Cherokee       |   13.4   | Trail passes Rainbow Falls and  | G-3.
      Orchard          |          |   around Rocky Spur.            |
                       |   14.4   | Trail passes around Bullhead.   | G-3.
                       |          |                                 |
                       |   16.8   | Good horse trail.               | G-3.
    via Roaring Fork   |   22.4   | Longest trip to Mount Le Conte, | G-3.
                       |          |   but interesting.              |
  The Jumpoff          |    6.5   | Jagged mountain peaks.          | H-3.
  Charlies Bunion      |    8.6   | Reminiscent of the rugged       | H-3.
                       |          |   Rockies.                      |
  Gregory Bald         |   11.0   | Best display of wild azalea in  | B-4.
                       |          |   mid-June.                     |
  Chimney Tops         |    3.0   | For the experienced hiker.      | G-3.
                       |          |   3 hours, round trip.          |
  Mount Cammerer       |   12.0   | Fine view of valleys and        | K-1.
                       |          |   mountains.                    |
  Ramsey Cascades      |   12.0   | Largest cascades; stands of     | I-2.
                       |          |   virgin hardwoods.             |
  Raven Fork Wilderness|   16.0   | Largest stand of virgin red     | J-3.
                       |          |   spruce and balsam.            |
  Mount Sterling Tower |    5.2   | Accessible fire tower.          | K-2.
  Sharp Top on Noland  |    4.0   | Interesting hike.               | G-5.
    Divide             |          |                                 |
  Bryson Place         |   20.0   | Follows Deep Creek to Bryson    | H-4.
                       |          |   Place, and Nettle  Creek into |
                       |          |   a fine stand of virgin        |
                       |          |   hardwoods.                    |
  —————————————————————+——————————+—————————————————————————————————+—————




Roads and Trails


There are 66 miles of high standard roads in the park including the
transmountain highway from Gatlinburg, Tenn., to Cherokee, N. C.
Clingmans Dome Highway reaches an altitude of 6,311 feet. Seventy
miles of secondary roads and 653 miles of horse and foot trails are
available for hiking and riding.

The park highways offer exceptional opportunities to view the
grandeur of the Great Smokies. Spur roads and trails lead to many
points of interest.

There are trails of all types to suit your individual requirements.
Some are 4 feet wide on easy gradients; some are improved footpaths;
others merely tracks through the forest. Park forces try to keep
trails drained and clear of brush and other obstacles; but the
country is rough, and hikers should wear suitable outdoor clothing,
including stout low-heeled shoes. If you are an inexperienced hiker,
you should be especially careful and watch your footing on the
trails.




The Appalachian Trail


The Appalachian Trail crosses the park and follows the ridge of the
Smokies for most of its 71 miles. The eastern portion, from Davenport
Gap at the northeast corner to Newfound Gap on the transmountain
highway, is 31 miles long and follows through an absolute wilderness.
The western portion from Newfound Gap to Fontana Dam just outside
the park, is 40 miles long. Most of the trail is over 5,000 feet in
elevation.

There are 7 trailside shelters and 3 trailside campsites along the
71-mile section of the Appalachian Trail in this park from Davenport
Gap to Newfound Gap (31 miles) and Newfound Gap to Fontana Dam (40
miles). These are nearly equally spaced for 1-day hiking trips.
Shelters are closed on 3 sides and provide simple bunk accommodations
for 6 persons. A fireplace is in front and water is available nearby.
Use of the shelters is normally restricted to 1 night. Camping is
permitted along the trail only at the above points and a camping
permit for each trip is required. (See page 8.) Because of the
scarcity of fuel at these sites, you are advised to carry primus-type
stoves.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


