The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hidden guns
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hidden guns

Author: Henry W. Patterson

Release date: November 16, 2023 [eBook #72146]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Ridgway Company

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIDDEN GUNS ***





                              HIDDEN GUNS

                         By Henry W. Patterson


Never within the memory of the oldest _voyageur_ had there been such a
snowfall in the Trois Lacs country. During the latter part of December
and all through January the gray clouds hung low over the tree-tops,
pouring down their load of fine crystals with sullen persistency, while
the north wind, sweeping through the forest, piled the flying flakes
high against all obstacles, driving them firmly into each crack and
crevice.

The two trappers on Cañon Creek fought the drifts for many days in an
effort to keep their lines clear. At last, however, when they woke one
fearfully cold morning to find not only the north window but also the
doorway on the other side of the little cabin covered with hard-packed
drifts that rose clear to the peak of the squat roof, they laid aside
their spruce-wood shovels with a sigh of resignation and relief.

Jim Henderson, gnarled and grizzled by years of life in the wilderness,
dug a narrow tunnel to daylight. While he went to the creek and chopped
the water-hole clear of ice, his partner, a young tenderfoot named Nick
Hartley, cleared the snow from the wood-pile and sent a good number of
dry logs down the slanting chute into the cabin. The men then made a
final round of the traps and lifted those not already frozen and too
deeply buried. Thereafter the daily trip for water and more infrequent
attacks on the wood-pile were the only breaks in the dull routine of
eating and sleeping.

During the first few days the partners loafed about, enjoying to the
full the perfect relaxation that comes with the knowledge that work is
for the time being not only futile but practically impossible.

Time passed slowly, however, and gradually the atmosphere of content
began to change to one of restlessness. Nick, who had never before been
snowed up, was the first to feel the irritability that generally
accompanies a long period of enforced inactivity. One morning as he
crept down the tunnel behind a pile of firewood he said--

“Seems to me you picked a punk place to build this cabin--right under a
bank and only open on the south, where any fool ought to know a north
wind’d drift worst.”

Henderson knew very well that he had made a mistake in picking the spot,
but he did not care to have the fact called to his attention.

“Oh, I did, did I?” he flared in sudden heat. “Well, it’s comf’table,
ain’t it? I ain’t noticed you packin’ up yet. Durned glad to come in
here, you was, last Fall. If you don’t like it you know what you can
do--an’ where you can go, too!”

“Who said anything about not likin’ it? I didn’t. You know you foozled
it when you located here, or you wouldn’t holler like that before you’re
hurt.”

“Shut up!” blustered the old man.

“You make me plum tired. If you had any backbone at all, you’d have kept
your mouth shut in the first place, an’ not started whinin’ like a kid.”

Nick suppressed a surge of wrath and turned away, lest he rouse his
partner’s temper any further. He did not know that this was Henderson’s
method of weathering a long snowstorm--a hot argument every now and then
to act as a sort of safety valve, relieving the pressure of the bile of
boredom before it had accumulated to a dangerous degree.

Henderson made a few more attempts to rouse the younger man, but when he
discovered that he could not do it, he too grew silent and increasingly
angry. He resented Nick’s attitude, and Nick was quick to note the fact,
and to feel a like resentment not unmixed with apprehension as
Henderson, his pride forbidding him any longer to rage openly, took more
and more to muttering and cursing under his breath.

Nick worried gloomily over the change in his partner, not realizing that
a day or so of work on the trap-lines, and a few more pelts added to the
pile in the corner, would serve to bring both men back to normal
cheerfulness. He sulked and moped, and watched Henderson with hostile
eyes.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Such a state of affairs could not continue for long. A belated thaw had
at last set in. The snow was ceasing, and a few more days would see a
resumption of outdoor work, when a final flare-up occurred. It was late
afternoon. Henderson rolled out of his bunk to go to the creek for water
and found Hartley gazing at the snow-bound north window. The old man
laughed, a sneering, mirthless cackle.

“Enjoyin’ the view?” he asked.

Nick had been thinking of digging away enough to let some light into the
cabin, now that the snow had stopped drifting, but after that remark he
would willingly have died first. He grew red and tried not to notice the
question.

“Well, now,” went on Henderson, enjoying the situation, “I always liked
that view myself. It’s so much better ’n gazin’ at your sour-bellied
features.”

He picked up a pail and his snowshoes and added with elaborate
politeness:

“Possibly you could tear yourself away long enough to git some wood?
There ain’t any left, as you’ll see if you can wrench your eyes away
from that soul-fillin’ picture of Nature at her best.”

This was a long and difficult speech for Henderson, and he felt that he
had done a rather neat bit of work in getting it off so smoothly. He
chuckled again as he opened the door and started up the tunnel.

When he heard that laugh, something snapped in Nick’s brain. He whirled
in a frenzy and rushed to the door.

“By ---- I’ve stood all I’m goin’ to from you!” he cried wildly. “You
keep out of here or I’ll beat the livin’ lights out o’ you.”

His voice rose to a shriek as he poured out his rage in a flood of
vituperation. Henderson, standing at the top of the tunnel, went flaming
hot with a fierce joy.

“Come out here an’ say that!” he yelled. “Come out, ---- you!”

At that moment Nick, frantically eager to obey the summons, dived into
the tunnel. His head and shoulders struck its roof. A slight upward
surge as he plunged, and the snow slumped in with a dull rumble. Nick
was swept back into the cabin by a miniature avalanche, and Henderson
stood staring at the tumbled groove where the tunnel had been.

In the next few instants the old man’s opinion of Nick underwent a
radical change. His exhilarating wrath became red fury, born of the
conviction that his partner was a coward--who had played a sneaking but
effective trick that left Henderson ridiculously helpless. As this
realization swept over him he grew dizzy and swayed on his feet, while
the veins stood out on his purple neck. When he could control his limbs
he floundered to the chimney and began to roar inarticulate masses of
blasphemy at the man below. At last he managed to form a coherent
sentence.

“Wait!” he bellowed, sobbing. “Great ---- just wait ’til I get you! If I
don’t rid the earth o’ your ---- drivelin’ carcass. Coward! ----’s too
good for the likes o’ you! Hangin’s too good! Shootin’s too-- Oh, gimme
my gun! I’ll shoot you down like a yeller dog! I’ll drill you like a
sieve! Just wait!”

He surged back to the tunnel as the smoke from the fire strangled him
and, snatching up a snowshoe, began to dig furiously.

Nick, listening to this tirade of abuse, began to feel a panicky terror.
Henderson’s gasping, choking voice sounded perfectly demoniacal as it
reverberated in the chimney, and the frightful threats were delivered
with the frenzy of a raving maniac.

The long siege had been too much, thought Nick. The old man had gone
suddenly crazy--crazy with the lust for blood. Weren’t the papers always
full of stories of men who shot people in bursts of insanity and then
grew sane again? If Henderson could get his gun now, he would surely do
for him, unless he shot Henderson first-- or unless--but he didn’t want
to run. He must do something, though!

His partner’s snowshoe was crunching nearer and nearer the snow-filled
doorway, while the digger gasped great lungfuls of air into his heaving
chest. Nick stood hesitating for another moment, glancing about the
dim-lit room while the candle on the mantel spluttered and wavered. Then
he ran to the shelf by the bunks and with trembling hands gathered up
the two revolvers, the rifle and all the cartridges.

Three minutes later Henderson burst in. Nick stood waiting for him with
set face in front of the fire-place. The old man kicked the little pile
of snow to one side and shut the door carefully. Then he whirled and
charged across the cabin. His partner met him half-way.

The desperate rough-and-tumble fight that followed raged for an hour,
all about the little room, under the bunks, almost in the fire. Stools
flew everywhere, extra clothing fell from the walls and got tangled up
with the writhing swelter of arms and legs, ashes swirled, while the men
panted and tugged, punched gasping, short-armed punches, neither giving
an inch, seemingly as strong and fresh as ever.

Then of a sudden as they rose together Nick made a terrific effort to
hit the old man on the jaw. The old man dodged back sharply and the fist
swished harmlessly past. Nick half-turned and stumbled forward, unable
to overcome the momentum of the blow. He blundered heavily against
Henderson, who had not regained his balance. They crashed to the floor,
rolled apart, and lay flat in utter exhaustion.

Henderson at length drew himself with much grunting to a sitting
posture. He sighed as his eyes took in the wreckage of the room.

“What a couple o’ durn fools we be, anyway,” he remarked heavily.

Nick rolled over and met his partner’s wry grin with a hoarse chuckle.
He too sighed as he surveyed the hodge-podge of furniture and clothes
sprinkled with ashes. The old man staggered to his feet and made for the
door to let some fresh air into the reeking room. As he stepped over
Hartley he stopped and reached down a sweaty hand.

“An’ I figgered you was a coward,” he remarked. “Man, you’re a wild
cat!”

“Aw, heck,” said Nick as he grasped the hand and pulled himself erect,
“you’d ’a’ done me up easy, if you hadn’t been all in from diggin’. An’
say, Jim,” he snickered again--“I thought you’d gone crazy! Honest I
did. I was that scared I--”

Henderson had reached out to unlatch the door when the wooden handle
lifted seemingly of its own volition. The heavy door swung inward with a
rush, and three men leaped into the shack.

“Put ’em up!” said the leader, greasy-looking and fat.

“What--” began Henderson in utter bewilderment.

Then he caught the gleam of an automatic, and his hands rose reluctantly
above his head. Nick, after a suddenly suppressed motion toward the
shelf, followed suit dumbly.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The other invaders came forward, each with a snowshoe thong formed into
a noose. They deftly slipped these over the upstretched hands, drew them
tight with a jerk and tied them.

“Now, then, hands down--way down,” went on the fat man.

The thongs’ free ends were tied with painstaking care to their wearers’
ankles.

“Bring ’em over here where we can look at ’em.”

The fat man walked to the hearth. The prisoners were pushed after him.

“See here,” said Henderson, as his tall, dark jailer finished searching
him and started a thorough investigation of the cabin. “What’s the
meanin’ o’ this, anyway?”

“Why,” responded the fat man in a confidential tone, “we’re hungry, see?
So we decided to ask ourselves to dinner with you and your buddy.”

Nick’s guardian came back from his inspection of the premises.

“Say, Cap,” he said, “there’s plenty of food, all right, but there ain’t
no guns here.”

“Have you looked everywhere?”

“Sure, an’ so’s Tony. Why was you so leery o’ jumpin’ these holds?”

“What’d ye jump ’em for anyway?” grumbled Tony.

“I’ll answer both them questions while we rest a bit,” said the fat man
indulgently. “As to jumpin’ ’em when they’re fightin’, Perry, you never
want to do that. It’s takin’ a chance, because there’s generly a gun
that both’s tryin’ to grab, an’ it may go off any time right in your
face. An’ Tony, didn’t I give you my reasons for jumpin’ ’em at all
before we got here? You’ll know when you’ve been workin’ at this work as
long as I have that news can travel fast--mighty fast. How was we to
know they wouldn’t recognize us, from a description or somethin’? How
was we to know one of ’em wasn’t a bull? An’ lastly, how was we to know
but what they might try to stick us up, if we didn’t get the hop on
’em--an’ us just oozin’ cash? We couldn’t answer a one of them questions
’til we seen what was what, could we? Play it safe, boys,” he ended,
patronizingly conscious of his superior astuteness, ‘an’ you’ll always
come out on top, even if you do make it unpleasant for the other feller
sometimes. See?”

He teetered ponderously on the heels of his moccasins and drew forth a
silver case.

“Have one?” he offered, holding it out to Henderson and Hartley. “No?
Sorry.”

He lit a cigaret with a flourish. The old man paused in his snarling
efforts to twist out of his bonds and coughed savagely, but his partner
lay quiet, a scared look in his eyes.

“Now,” said the leader of the gang, “let’s rustle some grub. Here--” he
stirred Henderson with his foot--“where’s the breadbox?”

“Get your foot off me!” burst out Henderson. “What kind of a game you
tryin’ to pull off, anyway? Come into a man’s cabin with your hifalutin’
gabble an’ tie him up. Lemme go!”

“Will you rustle some grub if I do?”

“Not by a durn sight I won’t!” the old man roared. “I’d rustle you an’
your dirty gang to ---- out o’ here, if I had a gun!”

“Yeah--if,” taunted the fat man. Then, “Why ain’t you got one?” he
snapped suspiciously.

“That young idiot lost it somewheres, that’s why,” gritted Henderson,
while the “young idiot” gave fervent though silent thanks for his
partner’s quick wit.

The fat man turned to Hartley, who shrank away.

“Well, you goin’ to act nice an’ sociable an’ cook us up some grub? We
got to move on pretty quick, an’ it’ll be all for the best if you hustle
about it.”

“Yes, sir,” said Nick eagerly. “I’ll do my best for you.”

“Blasted little slob,” muttered Henderson.

“There, that’s something like,” said the fat man heartily.

He was enjoying himself thoroughly. His manner became even more grand as
he continued:

“It ain’t every man has the privilege o’ waitin’ on me. I cut quite a
figure, down where I come from.” He gestured, his cigaret held jauntily
between his pudgy fingers. “Why, me an’ my pals cleaned up a whole
fortune in just two hours, not so many nights ago. Oh, it’s all right
Perry,” he reassured his companion, who had turned with a warning oath
from his task of loosening Nick’s bonds so he could move about. “I doubt
if anybody’s goin’ to look for us up this way, an’ I know our friends
here won’t squeal on us.”

He leered.

“Tony’s a good pard when it comes to disappearin’, eh Tony?”

He chuckled again, glowing more and more in the light of his own
importance as Tony grinned in a pleased way.

“Say,” he said to Nick, who was digging out some meal from the food-box,
“hustle that grub, you hear?”

“Yes, sir, I am, as fast as I can,” answered Hartley.

Henderson at this point made a furious effort to free himself, fairly
bursting with rage.

“That’s right,” said the fat man, glancing at Henderson with a tolerant
smile. “Now let’s fix the fire. Gettin’ a bit chilly, seems to me.”

Nick started toward the fire-place.

“There’s no more wood,” he said.

“Go get some, then, don’t stand there like a fool.”

“I’ll have to dig for it.”

“Better let me go, Cap,” said Perry.

Nick looked at him in ill-concealed relief.

“No!” snapped the fat man, noting the glance. “What the ---- are you
buttin’ in here for? Let the boy go. He knows where ’t is, an’ I’ll bet
my shirt he won’t try to run off in all this snow an’ cold. You bring in
all the snowshoes an’ duffle while I turn him loose.”

As Perry came back with a load of packs and snowshoes the leader said to
Nick:

“Now, then, young feller, don’t go tryin’ any monkeyshines. You bring
that wood in peaceable, or--”

Quick as light his right hand fluttered and a bullet spat into the
threshold of the door, so that Perry’s descending foot covered the hole.

Even Henderson, crouched against the wall and watching his partner with
veiled speculation and anxiety, was impressed by this display. He drew
in his breath sharply. Nick was frankly frightened.

“See?” said the fat man, replacing the automatic in his hip pocket. “An’
Perry an’ Tony are most as good as that, too. It’s easier to draw from a
holster,” he added in explanation.

“Yes, sir,” answered Nick. “I’ll be as quick as I can.”

His bonds were removed and he hurried out, rubbing his wrists.

“Shut that door!” roared the fat man.

Nick rushed back and closed it.

The fat man turned to Henderson.

“How long will it take him to get that wood?” he inquired. “No fooling,
now!”

His hand flickered as Henderson hesitated.

“Not very long,” said the old man hastily. “’Bout five-ten minutes, I
guess. He’s got to burrer down into the snow, that’s all.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

The fat man walked about the room restlessly, glancing here and there.
The candle sputtered. The graying coals of the fire settled with a
whispered crunch.

“What’ll ye do wid dese fellers, Cap?” inquired Tony after a while.

“Just wait till we’ve had some food, an’ we’ll decide,” answered the fat
man. “Say, though, it’s lucky you knew about this place, Tony. I’m near
starved.”

He grinned as he continued:

“If you birds hadn’t been fightin’ I dunno as we’d ’a’ found you at
that, in all this ---- snow. Too dark to see much, but Tony heard a
thumpin’ an’ crashin’ along the bank o’ the river somewhere, so we
breezed over. We come away in a bit of a hurry from where we last was,
an’ we’re in a bit of a hurry to git where we’re goin’, up to Tony’s
place, so this makes it pretty nice. Where the ----’s that other guy?
I’m gittin’ cold.”

Tony loosed his revolver in its holster and started silently for the
door, but just then Nick’s voice was heard, asking them to open up. He
stamped shivering into the room, covered with snow from head to heels,
carrying a great load of logs.

“Easy does it, young feller,” said the fat man, watching like a cat as
Hartley staggered to the hearth.

Tony and Perry closed in behind him, ready for anything.

Nick squatted down and dropped the logs carefully before the fire. He
selected some small, dry splints and put them on the coals, blowing
gently until they burst into flame. He gave one quick glance around him
before he carefully reached forward and placed a larger piece on the
blaze. Then with a sharp exclamation of pain he yanked his hands back
from the scorching heat, to wipe them on his shirt front, and in the
same instant leaped erect and whirled to one side. A revolver appeared
in each of his hands, and before one could think two spurts of flame
shot out. The fat man yelled and careened against the wall, clutching
his right shoulder. Perry crooked his arm with a startled oath as his
gun, holster and all, was torn from his numbed fingers.

“Up!” snapped Nick, and the bewildered Tony obeyed.

Henderson dived across the room, leaped prodigiously and sunk his head
in the fat man’s stomach. The fat man, who was clawing wildly for his
gun with his left hand, grunted and crumpled to the floor in agony.
Perry at this instant recovered his wits and rushed forward, snarling,
to stagger back, blinded by the impact of a gun-barrel across his eyes.

“Here!” yelled Henderson, squatting before his partner.

Nick lowered one gun, still covering Tony with the other. Henderson
grasped the barrel between his wrists and held it against the rawhide
thongs.

“Shoot!” he said, and Nick pulled the trigger.

The old man jumped up. His hands and moccasins were scorched, but he was
free. He grabbed Tony’s gun and covered Perry before the cursing man had
cleared his eyes of dizziness and blood.

A minute later the three invaders lay bound hand and foot. Nick and
Henderson stood looking down at them.

“Of course,” said Nick, “it’s easier to draw from your shirt front than
your pocket, but I’m pretty near as good as you, ain’t I?”

He bent to examine the fat man’s shoulder.

“Only a flesh wound,” he said to his partner. “I didn’t dare to try for
his gun in this light. It was too far behind him. That was a good one
you gave him, all right.”

“Yeah?” returned Henderson. “Why, I was all ready an’ waitin’ for that
play. What about the one you give Perry, huh?”

The fat man groaned and eased over on his side.

“Say,” he wheezed craftily. “A man that can shoot like you can is
wastin’ his time out in this ---- place. Why don’t you two come in with
us? There’s forty thousand in bills amongst us three. We’ll split it
five ways--eight thousand apiece. What about it?”

Henderson spat. Nick grinned.

“No,” he answered. “Not us, I guess. I seen your face in the papers too
many times a couple o’ years ago, an’ I bet it’s there today, too.
You’re wanted bad back in the States, old boy, an’ I know it.”

He turned to his partner.

“Jim, they’s no use us two tryin’ to take this gang out to the Poste.
I’ll start off now an’ bring in the sheriff an’ a few others to help.
I’ll be out there tomorrow night an’ back the next. All right?”

“All right, only hustle. We don’t want this place to be a pig-pen any
longer ’n we can help. Besides, we got to get out on the lines pretty
quick.”

“Listen.” The fat man saw it was no use to try to bribe his captors.
“You got us, an’ I don’t say it wasn’t my fault, not takin’ Tony’s
advice an’ comin’ in peaceable, instead o’ stagin’ a hold-up.” He gave a
twisted smile as Tony cursed him heartily. “But you’d never ’a’ done it
without pullin’ that hid gun stunt. I wish you’d tell me before you go
just how in ---- you did that.”

This question was burning in Henderson’s mind as well, though he gave no
sign, only smiled a superior, tolerant smile as if such a thing was of
every-day occurrence.

[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the August 30, 1923 issue
of Adventure Magazine.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIDDEN GUNS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


